 
Policy:  HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
Category 
Human Resources   
Approval Date 
March 2022  
Effective Date 
March 2022  
Supersedes 
October 2017  
 
©2016 Vanderbilt University Medical Center.  All rights reserved. 
 
 
Inquiries: Human Resources (615) 343-7000 
 
Applicable to 
 
 VUMC 
 
 
 
Team Members Performing 
 All faculty 
& staff  
 Faculty & staff 
providing direct 
patient care or contact 
 MD 
 
 House Staff 
 
 APRN/PA  
 RN 
 LPN 
 
 Other:  
Responsible Committee 
 Human Resources   
 
 
 
I. 
Purpose: 
 
This policy provides an overview of our hiring process, employing temporary 
staff, and use of search firms.  
 
II. 
Definitions: 
A. 
Applicant: any jobseeker who 1) submits an application via Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center's (VUMC) online application process, and 2) 
meets the basic qualifications of the job as determined by job description 
and 3) does not withdraw from consideration. 
B. 
Candidate: An applicant who has been presented by a Talent Consultant or 
Search Firm for consideration to a Hiring Officer for a specific position. 
C. 
Hiring Leader: Manager or other VUMC employee with the authority to 
make a hiring decision. 
D. 
Talent Consultant: Human Resources staff member who supports the 
outreach, screening, and presentation of candidates to Hiring Leader. 
E. 
Requisition: An electronic submission filled out by a Hiring Manager, or 
their designee in Talent Central when they want to initiate recruitment for 
an opening. 
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 2 of 10 
F. 
Job Posting: Placing information about an opening on the VUMC careers 
website to notify the public and VUMC staff of employment 
opportunities. 
G. 
Regular Position (full time, part time): An ongoing position that has no 
defined end date. “Ongoing” does not mean that the position cannot end, 
just that there is no current expectation that the position will end at a 
defined time.  
 
a. Students actively enrolled in Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine (VUSM) professional degree programs whose primarily 
relationship within the medical center is that of an actively enrolled 
student will not be employed by VUMC due to potential or 
perceived conflicts of interest and/or commitment for VUMC-
employed faculty to ensure that the teaching, evaluation, and 
supervision of students remains unbiased and professional. 
 
H. 
Term position (full time, part time): A position expected to exist for a 
period longer than six months, but generally not beyond one year. A term 
hire may be appropriate when the department’s need is expected to last 
less than one year. Hires who are in term positions could receive notice of 
employment ending at any time in advance of one year. Hires in term 
positions are bound by all VUMC policies and procedures and must 
successfully complete an initial orientation period. Staff members in term 
positions are eligible for certain benefits. 
I. 
Full time: The status of a position in which the standard work schedule 
requires a minimum of 30 hours per week and offers eligibility for full 
time VUMC benefits (such as health care, flexPTO, etc.) 
J. 
Part time: The status of a position in which the standard work schedule 
requires less than 30 hours per week. Part-time positions have access to 
part time benefits based on their hours of work.  
K. 
Temporary position: A specific position limited to a duration of no more 
than six months which does not offer benefits (there may be some benefit 
exceptions). http://hr.vumc.org/benefits 
L. 
PRN position: PRN is an acronym that stands for the Latin phrase “pro re 
nata” or “as the situation demands”. PRN positions should not require a 
standard work schedule and are utilized on an as needed basis. PRN 
positions are budgeted positions; however, they are considered temporary 
and do not offer benefits (retirement may be an exception if all other 
requirements are met). 
 
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 3 of 10 
M. 
Central Labor Committee: CLC consists of organizational leaders who 
have final approval of staff requisitions prior to Talent Consultant posting 
position.  
III. 
Recruitment: 
 
A. 
Requisitions: Hiring Leaders use their departmental/divisional processes 
for gaining general and budgetary approval for creating and re-filling staff 
positions. Note: Faculty and House Staff see Section III (H).  Staff 
requisitions are entered by the hiring leader or delegate into Talent 
Central, routed for Central Labor Committee approval, and reviewed by a 
Talent Consultant prior to posting. Staff requisitions not requiring 
additional organizational approval will be determined by Central Labor 
Committee.  
B. 
Job Postings: Hiring of regular staff in Full-time; Part-time, PRN, Term or 
Temporary positions is coordinated through Human Resources. All 
positions are posted for a minimum of five days and viewable to internal 
and/or external applicants on the VUMC jobs website, 
http://www.vumc.org/careers. 
C. 
Advertising and Outreach: External advertising for open staff positions at 
VUMC is coordinated through Human Resources. This includes, but is not 
limited to, advertising on websites, targeted recruitment sites, newspapers, 
professional organizations, trade journals and the state employment 
service. 
D. 
Search Firms: While the use of outside search firms is discouraged, 
Human Resources can review and recommend firms and is responsible to 
secure contracts on behalf of VUMC. All search firms doing business with 
VUMC must contractually agree to comply with VUMC’s affirmative 
action obligations and to collect and provide VUMC with information in 
compliance with VUMC’s recordkeeping obligations. 
E. 
Approved search firms can serve as a resource for open requisitions with 
the specific approval from the VUMC Procurement Office. Unapproved 
search firms will not receive any placement fees. VUMC does not accept 
unsolicited resumes or other submittals. 
F. 
Applications: All applicants complete an online application when applying 
for open positions. 
G. 
Candidate Pools: To ensure consistency in the hiring processes and 
adherence to compliance requirements, Human Resources reviews 
VUMC’s Affirmative Action Plan to determine if specific hiring goals 
have been established for women and/or minorities. If goals exist, Talent 
Consultants and Hiring Leaders work to develop a recruiting strategy 
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 4 of 10 
focused on the affirmative action goals. Talent Consultants and Hiring 
Leaders also develop and implement outreach efforts to recruit qualified 
veterans and persons with disabilities. 
 
H. 
Faculty and House Staff Recruitment:  These two categories of employees 
use their own recruitment and selection process to include advertising and 
outreach, screening and testing, interviews and references.  Background 
checks are conducted centrally by HR for all employee groups including 
Faculty and House Staff.  Vaccination and I-9 requirements are consistent 
across all employee groups as well.  
 
IV. 
Due Diligence:  
A. 
Screening and Testing: The Talent Consultant will prescreen candidates 
through online questionnaires, video interviews and/or phone call 
conversation before developing a slate for the Hiring Leader to review. 
Use of testing tools must be reviewed by Human Resources to validate and 
ensure compliance with EEO/AA principles and guidelines. 
B. 
Eligible for Rehire: If an applicant or candidate has previously worked for 
VUMC then their HR record will be reviewed to determine if they are 
considered eligible for rehire.  If an applicant or candidate is not 
considered eligible for rehire based on previous VUMC employment, then 
their application will not be considered further. 
C. 
Interviews: The Hiring Leader should conduct interviews with qualified 
candidates using various methods such as in-person, video, phone and use 
consistent methods of inquiry to determine selection of the final 
candidate(s). Interviewing about past performance (using behavioral based 
interview questions available through Human Resources) is a preferred 
method to predict future performance. Questions should be job-related and 
not to be or perceived to be about race, sex, national or ethnic origin, 
religion, marital or parental status, sexual orientation, gender identity or 
gender expression, disability, military service or genetic information.  
D. 
References: For external candidates, references may be checked and 
documented prior to an offer being extended. For internal candidates, 
Hiring Leaders should speak with the current supervisor before making an 
offer on all transfers within VUMC. Hiring Leaders may also ask Human 
Resources to provide information on past performance. Hiring Leaders 
should use the same criteria for asking relevant reference questions as they 
use when conducting interviews. 
E. 
Background Checks: VUMC will conduct pre-employment post offer 
background checks for all positions. The VUMC pre-employment 
background screen program will be administered in compliance with all 
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 5 of 10 
federal, state and local laws. Where background checks are used, 
candidates should be informed that all offers of employment are 
contingent upon the successful completion of the background check and 
candidates cannot begin work prior to their hiring departments receipt of 
notification from Human Resources that they meet all pre-screening 
criteria. Human Resources utilizes a third-party vendor to conduct all pre-
employment background checks. The background check process begins 
after a contingent offer of employment is made and accepted by the 
selected candidate. These guidelines apply to the evaluation of background 
check results:  
1. 
Employment eligibility of new hires, transfers, and rehires will be 
determined by reviewing the findings against the established 
criteria and the job duties/requirements for each position. The 
determination will take into account the position applied for, as 
well as the relevant factors, including any legal and/or regulatory 
requirements.  
2. 
If the results received contradict the application, the candidate will 
be asked to provide explanation for review before any final 
decision is made.  If the candidate cannot commence employment 
due to failing their background check this will be notated in their 
recruitment file in the HR system.  An applicant will be considered 
for hire for at least six (6) months from failing their background 
check.  If a new hire commences employment and it is determined 
that they falsified their application, their employment will end, and 
they will be considered ineligible for rehire 
3. 
If a VUMC staff member accepts a transfer does not qualify for the 
new position based on the requirements of the new position such as 
results of a background check or other required checks, including 
drug and alcohol screens for the position they are transferring into 
they will not be allowed to transfer, and continued employment 
will be reviewed with Human Resources. 
F. 
Vaccinations: All VUMC employees are required to either obtain, 
commence the series, receive an approved exemption or provide 
documented proof that they have received the following vaccinations as 
part of the post offer, pre-employment process. New employees should 
provide this information prior to their first day of employment but will 
have no longer than thirty (30) days from their first date of employee for: 
o Measles 
o Mumps 
o Rubella 
o Varicella 
o COVID-19 
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 6 of 10 
o Flu (during flu season) 
o Hepatitis B – for employees whose jobs involve contact with patients, 
blood, body fluids or human tissue. 
o TDap (for specific departments) 
Vaccinations will be offered to new employees prior to and after their start 
date through Occupational Health during a vaccination orientation session 
or directly at Occupational Health. 
G. 
Pre-employment drug and alcohol screens: There are certain positions, 
departments and locations within VUMC which requires pre-employment 
drug and alcohol screens.  If the position, that a candidate is being hired 
for does require pre-employment drug and alcohol screens, the candidate 
will be notified by the Talent Consultant or Hiring Leader during the 
recruitment process. 
 
H. 
Disposition of candidates/record keeping: Hiring Managers are required to 
keep any notes, resumes, electronic (emails) or paper documents used 
during the interview process for two years after the hire is made. For 
purposes of appropriate record-keeping, and to comply with Vanderbilt’s 
EEO/AA obligations, the Hiring Manager will provide justification for the 
decision made for each candidate referred for interview. The Talent 
Consultant will contact the Hiring Leader after the hire is made discuss 
outcome for each candidate. 
 
III. 
Hiring:  
A. Offers: All new hires will receive an offer of employment that details their 
conditions of employment including compensation. An offer letter will be 
prepared by either by the Department or Talent Consultant to the incoming 
employee to ensure formal offer is on record.  The offer letter will detail any 
required pre-employment checks that must be completed by the incoming 
employee. Under certain circumstances, it may be necessary to rescind a 
contingent offer of employment. These circumstances include, but are not limited 
to the following:  
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 7 of 10 
1. 
A candidate fails to comply with established timelines associated 
with the pre-employment screening process. 
2. 
A candidate does not pass the pre-employment screen. 
3. 
A candidate omits or falsifies information on the application or 
related documents.  
4. 
Reference information is unfavorable or inconsistent with 
information provided by the candidate. 
 
5. 
New hire is not compliant with pre-employment vaccination or 
medical requirements. 
 
6. 
New hire does not obtain the required certification or license or 
credentials necessary to practice in TN or relevant state they will 
be working in. 
 
In the event that it is appropriate to rescind an offer, Human Resources 
will notify the Hiring Leader as well as the candidate in writing. 
 
B. 
Work Eligibility: New Hires will be required to complete Section I of the 
I-9 electronically upon accepting an offer of employment; but no later than 
the first day of employment. Documentation that establishes eligibility to 
work in the United States must be presented no later than the 3rd day of 
employment. Individuals who hold citizenship in countries other than the 
United States are subject to special conditions related to employment. 
Hiring Leaders who are considering hiring a foreign national applicant 
without relevant U.S. work authorization must contact VUMC 
Immigration to make sure that all legal and policy requirements are met 
before any job offer is made. 
C. 
Temporary Employees: Hiring of employees for temporary positions 
should be conducted through VUMC TempForce: 
1. 
To ensure consistency in hiring processes and adherence to 
compliance requirements, VUMC TempForce is responsible for 
contracting with and managing all outside temporary employment 
agencies as approved secondary vendors for non-nursing positions. 
The Nursing Support Services Department is responsible for 
contracting with and managing all outside temporary agencies as 
approved secondary vendors for nursing positions. 
2. 
Arrangements with individuals providing services with the intent 
to pay through accounts payable or other procurement processes 
should be reviewed and approved by Human Resources. The 
department should contact their human resources consultant for a 
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 8 of 10 
determination of whether a Consultant/Independent Contractor 
relationship exists. Those who do not meet the IRS eligibility 
requirements may be considered for hire as VUMC TempForce 
employees. 
D. 
Rehires and Bridging: A former employee may be considered for rehire if 
the separation from prior employment was voluntary and appropriate 
notice was provided and if the employee worked through the notice period 
as required by the department. (Hourly paid employees who resign are 
required to provide a two-week written notice and exempt employees who 
resign are required to provide at least one month written notice.) 
The Talent Consultant will review the HRIS system to verify eligibility for 
rehire before forwarding the application. The Hiring Manager will be 
advised of the former employee's eligibility for rehire. 
Some benefits http://hr.vumc.org/benefits can be bridged if an employee 
has completed at least two consecutive years of service in a regular or 
term full-time and/or part-time position immediately prior to their last 
separation or changes to temporary work-status and returns to a regular or 
term position in less than one year. Temporary positions are not counted 
when determining whether two years of service has been completed. 
E. 
Transfers: Employees must have successfully completed the orientation 
period and have remained in the current position to allow for a six-month 
evaluation period to be eligible for a transfer. Exceptions to the six-month 
period to transfer to another VUMC department must be granted by both 
the leaving and gaining departments with input from Human Resources. 
VUMC encourages employees retention and career development 
opportunities within the VUMC system. Individuals who are not meeting 
performance expectations must disclose any formal performance 
counseling to the Hiring Leader to be eligible to transfer within the 
VUMC system.  
 
F. 
Employment of Minors: VUMC does not employ individuals under the 
age of 18 in most regular positions. It may be appropriate to hire 
individuals who are under 18 years of age in temporary positions available 
through VUMC TempForce or in defined programs or positions. Due to 
safety concerns, minors may not work in certain types of laboratories or 
operate certain types of machinery/equipment. Minors are also generally 
prohibited from positions requiring patient contact or care. 
 
G. 
Employment of Family Members: Family members can be employed at 
VUMC. However, one family member may not have direct influence over 
the other’s conditions of employment (i.e., salary, hours worked, shifts, 
etc.). For the purpose of this policy, family member may be defined as 
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 9 of 10 
spouse, domestic partner, son, daughter, parent, grandchild, sister, brother, 
mother-in-law or father-in-law or someone in a close personal 
relationship. Disclosures are expected to be made through the conflict of 
interest process upon hire and on an annual basis. See HR – Relationship 
in the Workplace policy for additional details.  
 
H. 
Volunteers: Volunteers are not employees. All volunteer opportunities 
must be coordinated through Volunteer Services. Individuals interested in 
volunteering can contact Volunteer Services or go to the website at 
www.vanderbilthealth.com/volunteerservices/ for more information. 
Volunteer opportunities may also require background screening and on-
boarding requirements. 
V. 
Orientation 
An orientation to VUMC is provided to new employees, generally on the first day 
of employment. Clinical employees may receive additional orientation to learn 
more about the culture and expectations of the medical center. 
New Employee Orientation Period: VUMC utilizes a New Employee Orientation 
Period for newly hired employees. This orientation period provides the new 
employee an opportunity to acclimate to their new position and to VUMC and 
provides the supervisor an opportunity to develop and assess the skills of the new 
employee. Generally, for employees who are paid hourly, the orientation period is 
three months following the date of hire and for exempt employees the orientation 
period is six months following the date of hire.  
A. 
Internal transfers and promotions are not subject to an orientation period. 
 
B. 
In the event job performance or conduct during orientation is concerning 
or unsatisfactory; supervisors should promptly coach the new employee. If 
the concerns continue, the supervisor should give the employee written 
notice of the deficiency and explain how the performance or conduct 
needs to improve in order to continue employment. During the orientation 
period, employment may be terminated without notice. However, 
termination of employment should be reviewed with a human resources 
consultant prior to taking action. Termination of employment during the 
orientation period is not subject to the dispute procedure. However, if an 
employee believes that the termination of their employment is the result of 
unlawful discrimination they may consult with VUMC Human Resources. 
 
This policy is intended as a guideline to assist in the consistent application of VUMC 
policies and programs for staff. The policy does not create a contract implied or 
expressed, with any VUMC staff members, who are employees at will. VUMC reserves 
 
HR - Recruitment, Hiring and Onboarding  
 
Page 10 of 10 
the right to modify this policy in whole or in part, at any time, at the discretion of 
VUMC.  
VI. 
Approval:  
Amy C. Schoeny, Ph.D. 
Chief Human Resources Officer 
VII. 
References: 
 
HR – Relationships in the Workplace Policy  
HR - Relationships in the Workplace 
 
HR – Transfer Policy 
HR - Transfer 
 
